um hi good to see you guys as always I
would like to say a few things about
lagrange multipliers that's the subject
of the lecture on Tuesday when we talk
about Lagrange multipliers there is one
important aspect which one has to
realize and that is it has to do with
whether the curve we are dealing with is
bounded or not
okay the example which we discussed in
great detail last time was example where
the curve was an ellipse an ellipse is
bounded now what do I mean by
boundedness it's bounded because it can
be it is contained in a disk of a large
large enough radius okay so in this case
I think this was one and this was one
half and this is negative one negative
one half so we can take a disk of radius
1 and this entire curve will be inside
or if you want pick a disk of radius
tool to even bigger so for sure it will
be inside in other words there are no
branches of this curve which go to
infinity okay an object is called
bounded if it can be if it is contained
entirely in a large enough disk or a
ball if we are in a city mention space
okay so this curves are this kind of
curve is bounded and for bounded curves
the the method works in the best
possible way in the best possible way
namely we will be able to find to find a
maximum in a minimum of our function our
function will have a maximum point which
was here and a minimum point which would
here in our example but if the curve is
not bounded then it will not have a
maximum or minimum or both okay so
that's important remark that I wanted to
make because actually on the homework as
you have probably already seen there are
some exercises where that is the case
okay so let me contrast this to the
following curve and this is actually
exercise number three in 14.8
I know it's on homework but okay it's my
gift to you okay yeah well if you like
as I said I can do it I can do it again
maybe next week or a couple of weeks
alright so in this exercise the curve
with X is given by the equation X y
equals one okay so what is this curve
this curve well to understand that it's
it's best to rewrite this equation as in
a more familiar form y equals 1 over X
if you write it in this form we see
immediately that this is a graph of the
function 1 over X and that's what we
call hyperbola right so that's actually
something we learned a long time ago and
it looks like this it has two branches
one here and one here so this is the
point 1 1 and this is the point 1
negative 1 negative 1 right and in this
exercise you're asked to find the
maximum minima of the function f of X Y
which is x squared plus y squared okay
so this curve is not bounded so while
this was bounded this is unbounded why
because it's well intuitively because it
goes to infinity it has branches which
go all the way to infinity more more
precisely no matter how big a disk you
take it will not be contained this curve
will not be contained in that disk they
will still be some points outside so it
is not bounded and that changes the
equation also speaker as it changes the
game
so let's see what are the maximum minima
so let's apply let's apply blindly just
a Lagrange method and see what we get
so what rounds me answer tells us that
nabla F we should look at the equation
number F equals lambda times nobility
right so in this particular case in this
particular case the function f is x
squared plus 2 plus y squared so this is
2x 2y and the function G is XY right
because the equation is G X y equals 1
this equation so we get lambda times y X
right and then this crease points to a
system of two equations two x equals two
x is equal to lambda Y right and then
you have 2 y equals lambda X right so
from the first equation we find that
lambda actually it's better maybe too
high and of course there is a third
equation which I forgot which is X y
equals x y equals 1 right and so from
this let's do this in the following way
so let's say that
let's find y is 1 over X right and so
let's substitute substitute this in both
of these equations so we get 2x is equal
to lambda times 1 over X and here's to 1
over
X is equal to lambda times X right and
so so from this we can find that lambda
is equal to 2x squared right and so then
we substitute in this 2x squared so we
get to 1 over X is equal to 2 X cube
means that X to the 4th is equal to 1
which means that X is equal to plus or
minus 1 right so far so good okay so now
we find the top one so we find two
points we find two points one point one
point is 1 when X is 1 we use the
secretary's equation to find it in this
case y is also 1 and the second thing is
negative 1 and then again Y is also
negative 1 and then let's let's evaluate
the value of the function f f is x
squared plus y squared so we get value 2
and then here we also get the value 2 so
that looks like a puzzle because we just
follow blindly the method we find two
points so we we think well perhaps one
of them is a maximum the other one is
the minimum but when we evaluate the
function we see that the value let's say
so what does it mean does it really mean
that the function the maximum value of
the function is two and the minimum
value of the function is also two that
would mean that the function is constant
is equal to 2 everywhere but this
function is not constant right is x
squared plus y squared right for example
it is actually a good equal to zero here
I mean or it's not even constant on the
that's not a valid argument because we
have to look at the restriction of the
function to the to the our curve but the
restriction of the function to our
Cerf is x-squared plus 1 over 1 over x
squared right so again it's it's quite
clear that the function is not constant
so what happens so to see what happens I
mean so far I just did this calculation
blindly so I didn't like yeah that's
what you would do without drawing the
picture you just do the calculation and
then you see oh gosh I got this the
answers are the same so that's strange
what did it happen
so now let's find out what happened so
the best thing to do is to go back to
this to how we actually derive the
Lagrange equations in the first place
when we derive the Lagrange equations we
looked at the level curves of our
function in this case the level curves
are extremely simple they are x squared
plus y squared equals K and let's of
course the equation of a circle of
radius square root of K so the level
curves are concentric concentric circles
of all possible radii
and there's more there's more and more
and more so each of these circles each
of these circles represents the set of
points for which the value of the
function f is the same so for example
the function is take the same value on
on this circle it takes the same value
on this circles and so on so which means
in particular that the function is the
same here and here right and here and
here which at the point of intersection
of that level curve which our curve XY
equals 1 so now if you just look at this
you see that the value of the function f
increases as we go outward as we go
outward the radius of the circle becomes
larger and because the function is is
essentially the square of the radius of
the circle it grows when the when the
radius becomes larger and likewise it
becomes smaller when the radius becomes
smaller but because the curve is
unbounded you see that this function
doesn't have a maximum right because any
any real any positive real value greater
than the value at this point will
actually be realized and the value at
this point is equal to 2 right any value
will will be realized if you want a
value you know a million the value
million will be realized for maybe twice
million would be easier right so then it
would be like x and y equal to one
thousand you'll get twice two x times a
million so any any value will be
realized because because the function
because the curve is unbounded so then
the question is so that means that the
function actually has no maximum this
function has no maximum
a maximum value on this curve so what
about this values
well this values you realize that these
two points which I have marked in from
the beginning and this I actually you
can see that these are the smallest
possible values because all the this
exactly the points where the level curve
for F touches our curve right the level
curve for F is a circle and it touches
our core of the hyperbola at this point
and at this point so this is really the
smallest value the minimum value because
if you take if the if you take a radius
any smaller than this you will lose
contact
you will lose intersection with our
curve so therefore this is really the
part smallest possible value so I went
through this argument in great detail on
Tuesday was not repeated so that
argument is valid for these two points
and this argument shows that this are
indeed at the minimum values so it's not
surprising that the two values are the
same right so they actually they just
both I retained both given give us the
minimum value now it could happen for
example that I could just change the
setup and I could consider instead a
curve where the top branch the right top
branch would be going here so it
wouldn't be given by this equation but
it would be union of two curves once
they would be XY equal one in the third
quadrant and the other one would be XY
equals 2 for example right so then it
would actually be higher so in this case
if we apply Lagrange method we would
find again two points but the values
would be different so in that case again
we compare the values so if for example
it is the result of this calculation you
could actually get two and three say if
you choose the function it slightly
different way you could get a different
value and then it will be even more
tempting for you to say okay this is
maximum this is the minimum but actually
neither it would not be I mean the
center would not be correct one of those
two answers would be minimum namely the
one
smaller right but the function still
wouldn't have a maximum because the
branches go to infinity okay so in other
words don't think that the fact that
they're both equal equal it's the only
possible scenario for which indicates
that the function doesn't have a maximum
you could even have two different values
but both of them what say one of them
would be minimum one of them would be
neither maximum minimum and no maximum
it's also possible okay
so so this two are actually mean two
minima finally there is the possibility
that the function that the function
doesn't have either maximum value or
minimum value on the con given curve for
instance let's take the function y let's
say let's say let's take just half of
the hyperbola
let's take let our curve be y equals 1
over X and and Y and y greater than or
greater than view and let's take a
function f let's just take Y we can do
that right so in this case clearly there
is no maximum value because it goes to
infinity right same reason but there is
also no minimum value for a slightly
different reason it's not because the
function goes to minus infinity the way
it goes to plus infinity you know on
this part it goes to 0 so it you might
be tempted to say that the minimum value
is 0 but you can't say that because that
value is never attained values here is
never attained you get as close as
possible to it but it's never taped so
so that means that there is no there is
no minimum value because the 0 value is
not obtained in any value which is above
0 is attained but it's not the smallest
one because you can always take one half
of it then it gets smaller value right
so this function has no neither neither
a maximum nor a minimum
so in other words to summarize what it
is boundedness which guarantees the
existence of maximum minimum if you have
a bounded domain you will always have a
maximum and a minimum if the domain is
not bounded or curve is not bounded in
this case all bets are off anything can
happen you might have only a maximum but
no minimum only minimum or no maximum or
neither
finally keep keep in mind the following
thing that here I wrote this equation
just by itself right just by itself I
did not put any limits I didn't say what
are the ranges for x and y right so if
there is no internal limit it means that
they are they could be arbitrary that's
why I drew the entire hyperbola but
there could be variation on this problem
where
[Applause]
let's say exactly let's look at this
problem and let's do the following
variation on this problem where I would
also say y equals 1 over X but I would
actually put explicitly the ranges say X
is between 1 & 2 and then I will ask
maximize and minimize or find maximum
minima of the function f of X y equal Y
if I do that then my my curve is not the
entire hyperbola or not the entire
branch of the hyperbola which is drawn
over there but only the part between 1 &
2 right and the part between 1 & 2 looks
like this so this would be the two
endpoints so this is 2 and this is 1
this is 1 and this is 1/2 so in this
case you see the curve actually has
boundary points so it is just like when
we maximize minimize functions in one
variable calculus on an interval which
includes the end points so in this case
the maximum minimum could well be
attained at the endpoints which is what
happened here here the maximum does
exist it's at this point because XI
because since I impose this condition I
cannot go any further in the previous
example I had the entire hyperbola which
went to infinity
it was unbounded this guy is bounded it
is certainly sitting inside a large
enough disc right this curve is bounded
so there is indeed the maximum and the
minimum and the maximum is when X is 1
and Y is equal to M in this case Y is 1
so let's just write F as 1 and the
minimum minimum is that X equal to in
which case F is 1/2 okay any questions
about this
so I try to give you several
representative examples to give you an
idea what are the what are the
possibilities and you should keep this
possibility in mind when you when you do
problems like this when you solve
problems like this usually there is no
way of telling for and for an unbounded
curve there is no way of telling whether
the points which you find are maxima and
minima just from the algebraic analysis
like this you really have to visualize
the picture you have to use some ways to
reason to argue why it is maximum or
minimum in this case for example let's
say you don't want to draw the picture
you could argue as follows you could say
okay so both are the same which means
that well we know that function is not
constant both are the same so it could
be either maximum or minimum which one
is it is it a maximum or a minimum well
on this curve I could find the point for
very large X so let's say X is a million
then Y would be one over a million so
it's like really small so the value
would be a million squared so on this
curve I can find a point where the value
is the million or million squared right
so which is greater than two aha so that
means this is the minimum and not a
maximum so that's one way to argue even
without drawing the picture but you have
to have an additional argument to say
which one is it maximum or minimum okay
so let's move on to the next subject and
the next subject is integration I
promise you the beginning of this course
that we will or maybe not promised I
promise not a good word but I I told you
I kind of gave a preview and I said that
essentially you can break the material
into two parts one is integration and
the other one is differentiation they
said in some sense two opposite
operations that we do in calculus what
we've studied in the last few weeks was
the differential calculus we studied
things related to differentiation like
lagrange method where to find the maxima
minima we had to take derivatives we
have to take partial derivatives for
example and then solve some equations
and now for the next few weeks we will
talk about integration okay so today is
the first the first installment of
integration so what do we need to know
about integration well first of all I
would like to recall as always what we
learned about integration in one
variable calculus actually we already
talked a little bit about this before so
I'll be very brief in 1 variable
calculus we are used to calculating
integrals of a function one variable
over an interval say from A to B so
there are several there are several
things that we learned in that regard
the first the first thing that we
learned is that indicates when the
function is no negative on this on this
interval for X between a and B so let's
say this is a and this is B so if the
function is non-negative then the graph
of this function is going to lie
entirely over this interval or more
precisely the part of the graph above
this interval or responding to this
interval will lie above the x-axis in
other words I want to avoid the
situation where it goes it's on above
and below the x-axis I'm not really
losing much generality by assuming that
because even if it were below I could
just add a constant sufficiently large
constant to the function and raise it
above above the axis and so then the
integral will be different from the
original integral by the integral of
that constant but the integral of the
constant we know it's a constant times a
times D minus a so that's sort of
doesn't really we don't really lose my
generality by assuming here that the
function is non-negative on this
interval and if it is non-negative then
I
surely this integral represents the area
and what we call usually informally
under the graph and when we say under
the graph we mean between the in the
area of the region bounded by the graph
the vertical lines y equal a and y equal
B and the x-axis oh yes
x equals that's right sorry thank you
x equals a and x equal x equals a sexist
because this is y called here and it's a
graph which is y equals f of X all right
so that's the first aspect that this is
where integral gives us the area under
the graph that's number one
so you see function is in one variable
the function is in one variable but you
get an area of a two-dimensional object
you start with a function in one
variable but you naturally get a
two-dimensional region because you look
at the graph and the graphs on the plane
you add one more variable Y and then you
use the graph at the boundary of this
region so you get a two-dimensional
region and it has an area and that area
is represented by the integral okay
so that's the first aspect the second
aspect of this of the study of the
integrals is how do we define it so
first the first aspect is what does it
represent and the answer is that it
presents the area the second aspect is
how do you define it and the way you
define it is somewhat somewhat subtle
the way we define it is we break this
into this interval into smaller pieces
and then we approximate the function by
this by the step functions like this by
just constant functions on each of these
intervals
and so on and so and that gives us the
possibility to approximate the entire
area this entire area is the sum of
areas of all of those little of all
those elementary rectangles so let's say
here the one rectangle will look like
this one of these rectangles will look
like this where this side will be Delta
X and this side will be Delta Y it's
actually not a good idea let's call it
it's just going to be F let's say this
is the point X I in the partition this
is a X I plus 1 this will be f of X
laughs and then the point is that we
don't know a priori at the beginning
what the area of this complicated region
is but we certainly know what the area
of this one is and the area of this one
is f of X I times Delta because it's the
ranked angle a rectangle in for a
rectangle the area is just the product
of the sides so this is this is the
important thing which we have to know in
advance the area of the elementary piece
and after this we take the sum so let's
call it area number I and then we take
the sum of this area's number i from 1
to n so so let's say that there are n
and parts and pieces in this partition
and the size of each of them is Delta X
that's this Delta X which I which I'd
wrote which I wrote here so then this
one we take this as if as a as an
approximation to the value to the area
and then the point is that as n goes to
infinity as this piece has become
smaller and smaller
this approximation for for functions
let's find some good properties like
continuous functions it's going to
approximate this area better and better
and so the actual area we will get in
the limit when n goes to infinity and
that's this interval and so you
recognize f of X DX and coming from this
expression f of X Delta X which
corresponds to the area of this
elementary rectangle so there are there
are some methods in mathematics which
allow you to show that this limit
actually exists and so this therefore
justify this definition and again for
that you actually have to make some
assumptions on the function f but all
the functions which we will consider in
this course will go will satisfy this
assumption so I'm not going to talk
about it all right so that's the second
aspect the definition and finally the
third aspect is how do you actually
computed so I purposefully I
purposefully separate this to point the
definition and the calculation because
the definition is rather complicated and
in some sense it's a Taric because you
are you're breaking something in small
pieces and so on so this is this is sort
of the hard part of this story and but
this is something which has been done
you know it has been proved that this
process gives you a well-defined
definition of the integral and after
that we have to choose an efficient
method to actually calculate this
integral and therefore calculate this
area we are not going to cut to actually
calculate things by when we are going to
calculate things by actually breaking
into pieces and taking the sum and
taking the limit and I'm going to do
that each time in fact we have a much
more efficient method for calculating
this integrals and that's called the
fundamental theorem of calculus of one
dimensional one variable calculus or a
live in Newton form and that's the
formula which tells you that to find
this integral you need to take the
antiderivative
where where f of X is f prime of X so in
other words to calculate the integral
you have to perform the operation which
is which is opposite or reverse to the
operation of differentiation and it is
in this sense that we can say that
integration is reverse or opposite to
differentiation something which is not
at all obvious from the original
definition by by as an area or as a
limit of this partial sums but which is
which is nevertheless this is one of the
most important here and this is what we
use in practice to calculate the
integral okay so that's that I have
summarized for you the story of the
integral of a function one variable and
in this course we are dealing with
functions in two and three variables so
of course we are going to have integrals
for such functions as well integrals for
functions in two and three variables and
the structure of the story is very
similar to the structure which I have
just outlined it also has essentially
three part one is what does it represent
two is how do you define it and three
how do you compute it okay so let's talk
about functions in two variables
now functioning to very a function in
two variables also has a graph so let's
say you have function f of X Y function
two variables also has a graph and the
graph now lives in three dimensions so
we draw a three dimensional coordinate
system where in addition to our
variables x and y we introduce one more
variable which we call Z right
so the next the next step is to to
realize what is the analog of the of
this area under the graph so here we are
talking about the region which is
bounded by the graph and the x la the x
axis and this vertical that's vertical
lines 30 there is a clear analog of this
in the two dimensional case right
because in two dimensional case we can
instead of that instead of the interval
X from A to B we can look at the
rectangle where X is from A to B and Y
is from C to G the rectangle so let me
draw it so let's say this is X equal a
and I mean this is X X Cody and this is
X equal a and then this will be y equals
C and y equals D so I'm talking about
this rectangle so this is a this is B
this is C and this is D right I'm
talking about this right now
don't confuse this rectangle with this
rectangle because they're both
rectangles but they have totally
different meaning in this and this
rectangle or the variable is one side
and the other side responds to the
function and now we are just talking
about the variable now we have two
variables so we have we have this
rectangle on the XY plane and now let's
suppose that the function f of X Y our
function is non-negative on this on this
rectangle so that means that the graph
of this function are going to lie above
the XY plane if we look at the part of
the graph Chris pointing to this
rectangle so what what does it look like
so the way it's going to look is as
follows so this let me draw first kind
of walls of the office picture and then
so it's going to be something above
something curvy above this rectangle so
let's say so it could look something
like this
so this would be the part of the graph
part of a graph above above this
rectangle and the graph could go could
continue but we will only be interested
in what happens above this above this
rectangle so now we clearly have a
three-dimensional region
three-dimensional region which is
bounded by these walls and the walls are
respond to this the dotted line so the
walls correspond to the this vertical to
this vertical planes which which are
obtained by taking the segments and kind
of moving them vertically up right so
you got the three-dimensional region
bounded by those walls by this rectangle
at the bottom and by the graph of the
function at the top and this
three-dimensional region is a tree is an
analogue for our function in two
variables of this two-dimensional region
and the integral of the function f will
be defined will represent the volume of
this three-dimensional region right so
we've got the three-dimensional region
three-dimensional region which are will
often call it solid we refer it to salt
as a solid so can think of it a piece of
solid and the integral and let me
let me just write here so the integral
the integral of the function f of XY da
this will be the notation for this
integral over over this rectangle let's
call this rectangle R so this is r will
represent the volume of this solid so
you see all dimensions get bumped by one
here you have the function in one
variable so you're the bottom of this
picture is one dimensional it's an
interval but the region is
two-dimensional and it's represented by
a single integral whereas now you have a
function in two variables so instead of
one you get two you have a
three-dimensional region or a solid the
bottom of this region either is a
rectangle in your original variables x
and y and the volume of this
three-dimensional object three
dimensional solid is represented by a
double integral which is denoted like
this where da sort of stands for the
elementary area just like DX was
annotation for sort of the elementary
length okay so this is a notation this
is notation which we'll use and what
I've explained now is the first aspect
of the story which is what does this
integral represent this integral
represents the volume of this solid
provided that the function is above the
XY plane but again that is the
assumption we can make without loss of
generality because any function can be
made so by adding a sufficiently large
constant to it okay now the second
aspect of the story how do you actually
define it and again it's very much very
much parallel to the definition here you
break this solid into smaller pieces
to do that you first break the rectangle
into smaller rectangles by by choosing
some steps Delta X and Delta Y right so
you kind of make grid of rectangles with
sizes Delta X and Delta Y and for each
of this very small elementary rectangles
you do draw let's actually this to the
let's do this one see for each of them
you draw a sort of a skyscraper which
goes all the way up to the all the way
up to the graph you see so that sort of
like a skyscraper which sits like this
at this cell of this grid and and for
each of them you do the same and then
the point is that the entire volume can
be approximated as the sum of volumes of
those skyscrapers so this is precisely
analogous to what we did in the
one-dimensional case except now instead
of I mean in the one-dimensional case
the bottom was like a little interval
and now the bottom is going to be a
little rectangle so there will be sizes
Delta X and Delta Y but otherwise it
looks exactly the same
otherwise it was exactly the same
you see and so here is going to be the
height of this is going to be let's say
this is the point X I Y I in our
partition this the height would be the
value of the function f of X X Y and so
now we just use the same formula
except it's no longer area its volume
and it's not it doesn't depend just on
eye but it depends on I and J so I
actually should have said why I X I and
YJ the IJ cell of that grid so that
would be volume IJ and this would be f
of X I YJ times Delta x times Delta Y
and when we take the sum of all of this
volumes where N and M go to 0 and an M
being the to the the numbers of
partitions for x and y we will get a
double integral we will get our double
integral so exactly the same idea
approximate by sum of volumes of this
little of this very thin skyscrapers and
when the partition becomes finer and
finer this sum will tend to the actual
volume provided the dysfunction satisfy
some natural some natural properties
like being bounded and continues so
that's that's the definition but again
we're not going to use this definition
to actually compute things right we want
to use a much more powerful method like
the method which we have what is that I
have to be careful when I open the board
you never know what's behind so we want
to use them a more powerful method for
computation like the fundamental theorem
of calculus in other words we would like
to do it by taking some multi
derivatives of some sorts right and this
is what I'm going to explain now the
computation any questions so far
yes very good
that's right thank you I didn't rise to
actually the double is going to be
double summation that's a very very good
point I'm glad that you point this out
because this illustrates one more
clearly why it should be a double
integral because this is really a double
summation why is it a double summation
because it is a summation over little
rectangles in this grid so this grid
actually looks like this yeah so you
have so there will be you know 1 2 3 up
to n along this side and every 1 2 3 up
to M along this side and so it's really
double sum and in the limit the double
sum becomes a double integral any other
questions ok so now we talked about how
to compute this and we again take as a
hint we take the formula from the
1-dimensional calculus which is that we
essentially have to take the
antiderivative of our function but if
you have a function in two variables
it's not clear which antiderivative he
should take because actually our two
functions sorry two variables we talked
about when we talked about derivatives
we saw that actually two partial
derivatives respect to X and respect to
Y likewise there are two partial anti
derivatives you can take the anti
derivative with respect to X and respect
to Y and the point is that there is
actually an analogue of this formula in
which you actually have to do both you
have to both first take the
antiderivative with respect to one over
two variables and then anti derivative
with respect to the second one and that
will give you the answer so that's the
idea so let me explain that
so the computation is given by the
following formula that this integral f
of XY da over R can be written as what's
called iterated integral
iterative meaning that we do something
in one after another certain procedure
after one after another we iterate a
certain procedure and that procedure is
essentially taking the antiderivative
which we should do twice because they're
two variables right so that it's sort of
very reasonable and so the way it works
is the following we first take the
integral of x f of XY with respect to
the variable x say and so the limits
will be a to b so we take this integral
assuming that Y is a constant this
should remind you of the notion of
partial derivative so in fact when you
do that you will get you will use you
know for this you will get you can
express this as the difference of values
of a certain function of points B and a
and that function will be nothing but
the anti partial derivative with respect
to X of this function and as the result
you will get a function depending on Y
because think of this as a family of
integrals depending on Y so you have
integrated out X but Y still remains as
a parameter so the resulting object is a
function of Y and then you just
integrate this function of Y from from C
to D dy so that's called iterated
integral because you iterate the process
the procedure of taking antiderivative
or doing a one-dimensional integral but
you could also do it in the opposite
order so in some in that sense it's kind
of reminiscent of the clear-all theorem
which told us that we can apply partial
derivatives in in any order and we'll
get the same result likewise here we are
doing partial anti derivatives and we
can apply them in either of the two
possible orders giving us the same
answer
so that would mean that first we
integrate out da dy as a result we'll
get something which will depend on X so
in this integral with y is frozen and
exit the live variable so we're
integrating but then we start after we
integrate it we start remembering about
Y and we get a function of Y which we
then integrate likewise here Y is is the
live variable which we integrate but X
is the parameter 1 we integrate when we
make this integration we get something
which depends depends on X it's a
function of X which we then integrate
itself with respect to X so this had two
different formulas for the same integral
and depending on the choice of the order
first X then Y or first Y and then X and
the fact that you can write the integral
like this is what's often referred to as
a fubini's theorem
again this is something which we are not
going to prove what we are going to use
it in practical calculations just like
fundamental theorem of calculus we
didn't really prove it but we we used it
extensively to actually calculate one
dimensional integrals so let's see how
this works in practice
[Applause]
okay
okay so let's do this example say
suppose that the R is a rectangle where
X is from 0 to 2 and y is from 0 to 1
and the function f of X Y is X cubed Y
cubed plus 3 X Y squared
okay so you want to compute the integral
of f of X y da over this rectangle and
I'm just using for business for business
theorem so I have to choose which way I
want to integrate which variable first
goes first and let's say I want to do
first the Y variable so that means that
first I do the integral 0 1 from 0 to 1
X cube Y cube plus 3xy squared dy and
then I do need to respect to X from 0 to
2 now it is tempting to just continue
this formula writing this formula but
then you have to carry with you both
integration signs and so on and so this
is a sure way to make mistakes so I
think it's much better to do the first
integral do the inner integral first get
the result and then substitute it into
the formula it's a much more
straightforward way I think you will
you'll see it yourselves when you only
work on
so let's do the inner integral by itself
X cubed Y cubed plus 3x squared XY
squared dy from 0 to 1 use use the
fundamental theorem of calculus and
assume that X is just a scalar it's just
a constant so we have to take the
antiderivative of this right what's the
antiderivative of this 90 derivative of
Y cube is 1/4 of Y to the fourth and
this is just a constant for now we can
frozen it just like when we were doing
partial derivatives so just execute just
carry X cube next take the
antiderivative of this again thinking of
X is a constant you get XY cube and now
you have to evaluate at 0 and 1 and 0 so
you get 1/4 of X cube plus X right and
now substitute it back we have now
calculated the inner integral so let's
just put it in let us substitute it in
in this double integral so we'll get 1/4
X cube plus X yes right
so we get one over so now that's just
easy so it's just the usual way so
that's going to be 1 over 16 X to the
4th plus 1/2 x squared from 2 to 0 right
so that's going that's going to be 16
over 16 that's 1 plus 1/2 and that's
because I'm sorry
add us to see let's see ok any questions
yes single integral question is why do
we why do we take write it as a double
integral oh you mean the notation for da
or for this I see so the question is why
do we use this notation well see the
before the when we separated we were
writing say f sub X or F sub y for
partial derivatives so now I see so you
probably mean to say is that when we
would write it we would use this this
other D we would use this kind of curly
G and now we are using this D well
because the reason is that which is
really just D of X this is really like a
differential so here there is no
ambiguity ambiguity arises when you have
a function which depends on two
variables so then you have to say DF
respect to X or respect to Y right but
here we are taking DX X doesn't depend
on anything so there is no we don't we
don't have to give any additional
information about that so it's just a
differential when you have a function
one variable we still write just a
straight D right so X is like a function
of of itself so that's why DX it's the
same DX which we use in the
differentials actually
so it is with DX or not not this year's
but for now just think of it as an
outpatient
don't don't read too much into it okay
any other questions yes here okay well I
have to say that now we are studying
integrals are no different you should've
asked me this question when we studied
differential but since you asked me I
will answer it but think of this think
of this is a digression or think of it
as a as a time machine we are going back
in a couple of weeks when we talked
about this range of so remember DF is f
sub X DX plus F sub y dy so in principle
you could write DF DX and this would be
F sub X plus F sub y T Mikey right so
you could do that so and that by the way
is related to the derivatives of
implicit functions so but this is not
the same not the same as V F G F which
is just the notation for F sub X see
here there is an addition term because
the differential has two terms one
related to F X and one relate to F Y so
you you could you could divide this note
it's okay you'll get this expression for
what it's worth and in fact this is a
good way to find dy/dx when when you
have x + y constraint for example if you
know that f is equal to 0 or something
ethical some scalar that gives you a way
to calculate that's how you get the form
of dy/dx is going to be negative of FX /
FY this is the formula we studied when
we talked about implicit differentiation
right but this on the other hand with
curly G is just a new notation for for F
sub X so that's a difference but in some
sense this is not
this is related because actually this is
like this is the same DX as this DX but
it's not like DF because this is not
like DF f is actually outside of it of
the differential right this is just DX
and for DX we don't use like this
doesn't doesn't exist only this exists
this does exist okay
yes can I explain again okay um I would
love to but I actually had something
planned to talk about so maybe in the
office hours alright so but maybe it
might be that this what I'm going to
explain next this example from the book
so but let me take a look maybe number
two
well example number two by the way is
like it's just like this one right it
just looks like a different function but
it's actually very similar but let me go
let me move on actually - harder -
harder example so more difficult example
so what else can we do so that for now
for now the region of integration in
this example and in example number two
is the rectangle okay but we are
actually going to study more complicated
regions because well we know that on the
plane there are many other regions as
well so what makes you do here
so so the next the next thing we're
going to discuss is how to apply this to
compute more more general integrals for
more general regions so for example
suppose that you have the following
region it's defined by the following
formula okay
so let's draw this so X is from 0 to 1
and Y for each value of x y is confined
between within this value in this value
so to sketch this region what we need to
do is we need to do to sketch the graphs
of the two functions y equals square
root of x and y equals 2 minus X so the
first one is going to look like this
because I only look at it on this on
this region on this interval and 2 minus
X will look like this this is 2 this is
1 when we say that Y for each value of x
Y is confined between square root of x +
2 - x geometrically this simply means
that it lives on this little vertical
interval and so our region is just built
from this little vertical interval it is
just this domain this region shaded this
shaded region
so that's more complicated than then the
regions we have looked at it at so far
which were simply rectangles be like a
rectangle like this so how do we
approach this how do we calculate the
integral when the regions are given by
such formulas so the point is that
compute that we we just slightly
generalized our formula we still do it
as an iterated integral but we first
integrate over Y but we integrate with
with the bounds of integration
explicitly depending on X namely we'll
go from square root of x - 2 - X and
then we'll put our function f of X Y dy
you see now before the bounds of
integration were say C and D they were
fixed but now the bounds actually depend
on X because that's the way the region
works we integrate over for each value
of x we have a certain segment or
interval in Y and we are integrating
over this interval but the interval
itself the bounds of this interval
actually depend on X in this way but so
there is no problem because we're
integrating over Y so it is ok if the
limits of integration depend on X you
certainly wouldn't want to put something
depending on y in here but depending
putting the limits which are functions
of X only is okay so the result of this
calculation is something which depends
on X and it depends on X for two reasons
first of all the function may have
dependent on X so even in the old
calculation when the limits were
constant the result was a function of X
but now there is a second reason why
depends on X because the limits also
depends on X after you compute this you
get a function of X and then you
integrate the
function over the limits over the region
given Forex and and that region already
is independent of Y or anything else it
just it adjust constant zero one so
that's the formula it slightly
generalizes the old formula in that we
now allow the limit to depend explicitly
on on one of the variables so let me let
me let me do calculate this integral in
spots in a special case let's say F X Y
is 2 X Y so let's do the let's do the
inner integral from square root of x - 2
- X so you have 2 X Y Z Y so that take
the antiderivative of the same rule as
before take the antiderivative of this
function and the rest of this function
is x times y squared right because X is
a scalar and now you have to take it
between 2 - X and square root of x so
what do we get we get x times 2 minus x
squared - x times square root of x
squared what do we get we get 4x - 4 x
squared plus X cubed - x squared so we
got this so we got X cubed - -4
yeah minus five x squared plus four X
right so you see the result is just a
function of X I mean this calculation is
no no not much too much calm more
complicated in the previous calculation
the only difference is it in previous
calculation the limits were zero in one
okay so you substitute here at one and
you get a function of X now the limits
are square root of x2 minus X but again
you just substitute and you get function
of X you know you are going to get a
function of X anyway you might as well
allow the limits to depend on X also
right so yes
a very good question just I'll explain
in a second I'll just finish let me just
finish this example and I'm fine
so so what's the end result we just
substitute this into the outer integral
so we get 0 1 x cubed minus 5 x squared
plus X cubed right so this is going also
DX so that's 1/4 X 24 4 minus 5/3 5 or 3
X cubed plus 1/4 X 2 the source from 1
to 0 which is 1/4 minus 5 5/3 plus 1/4 X
to the fourth sorry once if
oh yes all right so all of you and just
me yeah
okay okay you're you were you all right
so 4x right so that that's going to be
2x squared so plus 2 is that okay okay
and then I'll let you calculate this
okay
now the this actually begs the question
which you asked which is is it possible
that we would have at some point
encounter integrals in which for both K
for both inner and outer integral there
will be some dependence of the limits on
X and y so let me answer this the point
is that this will never actually will
will never be necessary for the
following reason
so the most general though let's look at
the most general domain the most general
domain could look something like this so
the point is that I can always I can
always break it into what the book calls
regions of type 1 by by cutting it by
vertical lines in a service mark level
in a clever way I break it here into
five pieces and each of the five pieces
can be can be represented as as a region
of this type see so all of them can be
can be thought of in this way well in
this case that would be like if it
touches here but it doesn't this would
be the for example for this one it would
be so this would be some function y
equals f2 of X and this would be y
equals F 1 of X so here you would have y
equals F 2 and here you would have Y 1 F
1 of X so when you have this region what
are the what is the description of this
region the description is that X goes
from A to B see no dependence on
anything like but for each X the the
values of Y are bounded between F 1 of X
and F 2 of X for example in this case F
1 of X with square root of x and F 2 of
X was 2 minus X and any region can be
broken into such and so therefore then
the integral the integral would be equal
to the sum of integrals it goes without
saying of course that if you take an
integral
this entire region double integral over
this entire region which would be the
sum of the integrals over the small
pieces when you decompose it into a
disjoint union like this of
non-overlapping sub regions then this
the integral can always be found as the
sum of the integrals of the parts
integral of the whole thing is the sum
of integrals of its parts and then each
of those guys you can represent in this
way then of course the point is that
sometimes it is more it is advantageous
to represent it note by cutting by by
vertical vertical line but by cutting
back horizontal lines and this actually
gives you a way to give the serve a
second way to evaluate your integral and
sometimes it can happen that one way the
integral is very difficult to compute
but the other way it's much easier so
let me give you an example of this here
is an example
so suppose you have the region like this
so now X Y where Y is between 0 & 1 and
X is between no sorry X is between 0 & 1
and Y is between 0 & and x squared and
you have to you asked to compute the
integral of the function square root of
x cubed plus 1 G okay so let's let's
draw this region so X between 0 & 1 and
y between 0 and x squared it's a
parabola first so this is the future
this is 1 this is 1 this is right okay
so since it's written this way we can
write it down as an iterated integral in
the same way as we did in the previous
example so that means we would first be
integrating x over X right
so that would be I mean the notice first
but I mean outer integral with respect
to X but the internetter integral would
be with respect to Y so that would be
from zero to x squared square root of x
cubed plus one gy right so let's compute
the inner integral so the inner integral
here okay so this function looks very
complicated but remember we are now
integrating over Y so this is a constant
so constant function now for a few
because Y X is frozen so the
antiderivative is actually this constant
so to speak because it's in the pen of Y
times y and then you do it from zero to
x squared so you get square root of x
cubed plus one times x squared right and
now you have to integrate the result
which is very easy because you can
introduce a new variable Z which is X
which is X cube right and then VZ is 3x
squared DX
so that this becomes one third of GZ and
this becomes one third of V plus 1 DZ
right which is very easy
okay I just I'm just trying to save time
because I don't have two minutes left
so this is easy but don't do that on
your meter I have an excuse because I
don't have enough time to see it and I
want to explain something to you
so here is a here's a tricky question
which you'll find on the homework the
tricky the clicker question is the
following let's think at the same region
let's let us think of the same region
but from a different point of view let's
cut it by horizontal lines if we cut by
horizontal line that the same region
would be XY where now Y is between 0 & 1
and X is between what it is between the
square root of it is between the square
root of so this Y over that's red which
is square root of Y right right and and
1 you see so if I do that then the same
integral will be written like this so
now this would be the outer integral
will be respect to Y it's always the
case that the variable which is between
for which the limits are independent of
any variables which are constant like
zero and one
this is the variable which is the outer
variable outer integration variable of
outer integration and the the inner
integration will be from square root of
Y 2 to 1 right and then will be the
function will be X cubed plus 1 same
function but now we have to integrate
this with respect to X and you see this
much harder this is hard
because there is not clear what the
antiderivative weights of this see see
how much now you can appreciate how much
easier it is to calculate the
antiderivative of this function spec -
why because why doesn't know about X
right so this is a constant so you're
doing the antiderivative of a constant
function that's why you get this very
simple function and then you lock out
that you get x squared so it becomes
much easier but here you get a function
of X and it's not clear what the
antiderivative is you see so you have to
be aware of this that there are two
different ways to compute and one way
could be much easier than the other